Data validation quickstart (#4552)
catalyst-cooperative/pudl: docs/dev/data_validation.rst

Data Validation Tests
================================================================================

Quickstart
----------

Setup
~~~~~

The ``dbt/`` directory contains the PUDL dbt project which manages our `data tests
<https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/data-tests>`__. To run dbt you'll need to have the
``pudl-dev`` conda environment activated (see :doc:`dev_setup`).

The data validation tests run on the Parquet outputs that are in your
``$PUDL_OUTPUT/parquet/`` directory. It's important that you ensure the outputs you're
testing are actually the result of the code on your current branch, otherwise you may
be surprised when the data test fails in CI or the nightly builds.

We have a script, :mod:`pudl.scripts.dbt_helper`, to help with some common workflows.

Updating table schemas
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

dbt stores information about a table's schema and what tests are defined
in a special YAML file that you need to keep up to date.

That file lives in ``pudl/dbt/models/<data_source>/<table_name>/schema.yml``.

When you change a table's schema in ``pudl.metadata.resources``,

> you need to make sure that file is up to date as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you need to make a matching change to the corresponding dbt YAML file.
```

For now, you have to update the columns manually,
by editing the ``columns`` list in the appropriate schema file.

.. TODO 2025-08-19 Add `dbt_helper update-tables --schema` usage here.

Updating row counts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create or update the row count expectations for a given table you need to:

> * Make sure a fresh version of the table is available ``$PUDL_OUTPUT/parquet``. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Make sure a fresh version of the table is available in ``$PUDL_OUTPUT/parquet``. The
```

  expectations will be derived from what's observed in that file.

> * Add ``check_row_counts_by_partition`` to the ``data_tests`` section of the the table's
>   ``schema.yml``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``check_row_counts_by_partition`` to the ``data_tests`` section of the the table's
  ``schema.yml``, if it isn't there already.
```

> The initial ``data_tests`` for a new table might look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When ready to generate row count expectations, the ``data_tests`` for a table might look like this:
```
